README.md, before:

# Digital Twin for 2D Unsteady Flow Drag Prediction

Google drive link containing data :https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1aHDKlNZimPbHoVmeUZ5s75CI9-KJATCK?usp=drive_link

## Overview
This project introduces an advanced machine learning framework that integrates traditional Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) with deep learning to predict instantaneous drag forces on a sphere in 2D unsteady flow fields. By combining state-of-the-art CNN-LSTM architecture with a containerized deployment strategy, this solution dramatically reduces simulation time from hours to seconds, enabling real-time analysis and design optimization.

## Key Features
- **Advanced ML Pipeline**: Implements both a baseline Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) and an optimized CNN-LSTM architecture that extracts spatial and temporal features from CFD snapshots
- **High Prediction Accuracy**: Maintains >95% correlation with traditional CFD methods while reducing computation time by 65-75%
- **Containerized Deployment**: Fully containerized with Docker and Docker Compose, ensuring consistency and scalability across environments
- **Interactive Interfaces**: Features an intuitive Streamlit UI for real-time interaction and a Flask-based API for programmatic access
- **Configurable Parameters**: All key parameters (image resolution, normalization settings, physical drag ranges) are defined in `config.yaml`, ensuring flexibility and reproducibility

## Business Value

### Economic Impact & Efficiency Gains

- **Time Savings**:  
  - Reduces simulation time from over 1 hour to mere seconds
  - Accelerates design cycles by 40-60%
  - Speeds up prototype iterations and evaluations by up to 65-75%

- **Cost Reduction**:  
  - Estimated 40-50% reduction in high-performance computing energy requirements
  - Lowers per-simulation costs from $5,000-$10,000 to $500-$1,500
  - Potential savings of $150,000 to $450,000 annually for mid-sized engineering departments

- **Enhanced Decision Making**:  
  - Real-time, high-fidelity drag predictions
  - Enables rapid evaluation of design alternatives

### Industry Applications

1. **Aerospace Engineering**
   - Airframe design optimization
   - UAV aerodynamic performance
   - Potential fuel efficiency improvements: 3-7%

2. **Automotive Industry**
   - Drag coefficient reduction
   - Electric vehicle range optimization
   - Design cycle time reduction: ~45%

3. **Renewable Energy**
   - Wind turbine blade design enhancement
   - Solar panel array aerodynamic configuration
   - Energy capture improvement: 2-5%

4. **Marine Engineering**
   - Hull design efficiency
   - Propulsion system optimization
   - Fuel consumption reduction: 6-12%

## Technical Approach

### Data Preprocessing
- CFD snapshots converted to 64×64 grayscale images
- Drag force values normalized using MinMax scaling
- Dataset divided into 70% training, 10% validation, and 20% testing sets

### Modeling Pipeline
1. **Baseline Model**: Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) for initial drag force predictions
2. **Optimized Model**:
   - **CNN**: Extracts spatial features from CFD snapshots
   - **LSTM**: Captures temporal evolution of flow patterns
   - **Grid Search**: Automated hyperparameter tuning with K-fold cross-validation
   - **Output**: Single normalized drag value that can be converted to physical units

## Quick Start

### Deploy Using Docker

```bash
# Clone the repository
step 1:
git clone https://github.com/maelzain/DigTwinDragPrediction.git
cd DigTwinDragPrediction
step 2:
# Build and run containers
docker-compose up --build


to stop: docker-compose down
to rerun:docker-compose up

step 3:
run streamlit :streamlit run streamlit_app.py
run api: python test_api.py
```

Services will be accessible at:
- **Streamlit UI**: http://localhost:8501
- **API**: http://localhost:5000

### Run Locally

```bash
# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# Terminal 1: Start the Flask API
python api_server.py

# Terminal 2: Start the Streamlit UI
streamlit run streamlit_app.py --server.port=8501 --server.address=0.0.0.0


```

## Training & Evaluation

```bash
# Split dataset, train models, and save results
python main.py

# Evaluate models on test dataset
python evaluate.py
```

## API Testing

```bash
# Test API endpoints interactively
python test_api.py
```

The script will guide you through selecting an image, model type, Reynolds number group, and send a request to the API. The response includes the predicted drag in physical units.

## Project Structure

```
DigitalTwinDragPrediction/
├── code/
│   ├── models/
│   │   ├── baseline_model.py
│   │   ├── cnn_model.py
│   │   └── lstm_model.py
│   └── utils/
│       ├── csv_utils.py
│       ├── image_utils.py
│       └── data_loader.py
├── api_server.py         # Flask API for drag prediction
├── train.py              # Training routines (includes grid search integration)  
├── main.py               # Orchestrates data splitting and model training
├── evaluate.py           # Evaluates saved models on test dataset
├── streamlit_app.py      # Interactive UI using Streamlit
├── test_api.py           # Script for testing API endpoints
├── Dockerfile
├── docker-compose.yml
├── requirements.txt
├── config.yaml           # Configuration parameters
└── README.md

Best CNN+LSTM hyperparameters BY Grid search method: {'cnn.learning_rate': 0.0005, 'cnn.epochs': 30, 'cnn.batch_size': 20, 'cnn.latent_dim': 256, 'lstm.learning_rate': 0.0005, 'lstm.epochs': 100, 'lstm.batch_size': 64, 'lstm.hidden_size': 64}
```

## Future Roadmap

- Extend the framework to 3D flow fields and complex geometries
- Integrate real-time sensor data for adaptive model retraining
- Develop advanced MLOps pipelines for CI/CD
- Enhance visualization dashboards with detailed error analysis
- Implement transfer learning for cross-domain applications

## ROI Analysis

- **Initial Investment**: $75,000 - $150,000
- **Projected ROI**: 200-350% within 24 months
- **Break-Even Point**: Approximately 8-12 complex simulation projects

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please:
1. Open an issue to discuss proposed changes
2. Submit a pull request
3. Follow established coding standards
4. Ensure all changes are documented

## Contact

**Mahdi ELzain**
- **Email**: mahdielzain@outlook.com
- **GitHub**: [@maelzain](https://github.com/maelzain)

## Acknowledgments

Special thanks to Dr. Ammar Mohanna for valuable guidance and support throughout this project.

- **GitHub**:https://github.com/AmmarMohanna
## License

This project is licensed under AUB terms.

Commit message:

Mentioning that Lstm in this model is used only to extract the  features of CNN model and ensuring that the code is scalable enough in also thinference is ready for future adjusment that will check the a feasbility study of the LSTM to forecast the physicis embedded in the CFD simulaton.

README.md, after:

# Digital Twin for 2D Unsteady Flow Drag Prediction

Google drive link containing data :https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1aHDKlNZimPbHoVmeUZ5s75CI9-KJATCK?usp=drive_link

## Overview
This project introduces an advanced machine learning framework that integrates traditional Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) with deep learning to predict instantaneous drag forces on a sphere in 2D unsteady flow fields. By combining state-of-the-art CNN-LSTM architecture with a containerized deployment strategy, this solution dramatically reduces simulation time from hours to seconds, enabling real-time analysis and design optimization.

## Key Features
- **Advanced ML Pipeline**: Implements both a baseline Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) and an optimized CNN-LSTM architecture that extracts spatial and temporal features from CFD snapshots
- **High Prediction Accuracy**: Maintains >95% correlation with traditional CFD methods while reducing computation time by 65-75%
- **Containerized Deployment**: Fully containerized with Docker and Docker Compose, ensuring consistency and scalability across environments
- **Interactive Interfaces**: Features an intuitive Streamlit UI for real-time interaction and a Flask-based API for programmatic access
- **Configurable Parameters**: All key parameters (image resolution, normalization settings, physical drag ranges) are defined in `config.yaml`, ensuring flexibility and reproducibility

## Business Value

### Economic Impact & Efficiency Gains

- **Time Savings**:  
  - Reduces simulation time from over 1 hour to mere seconds
  - Accelerates design cycles by 40-60%
  - Speeds up prototype iterations and evaluations by up to 65-75%

- **Cost Reduction**:  
  - Estimated 40-50% reduction in high-performance computing energy requirements
  - Lowers per-simulation costs from $5,000-$10,000 to $500-$1,500
  - Potential savings of $150,000 to $450,000 annually for mid-sized engineering departments

- **Enhanced Decision Making**:  
  - Real-time, high-fidelity drag predictions
  - Enables rapid evaluation of design alternatives

### Industry Applications

1. **Aerospace Engineering**
   - Airframe design optimization
   - UAV aerodynamic performance
   - Potential fuel efficiency improvements: 3-7%

2. **Automotive Industry**
   - Drag coefficient reduction
   - Electric vehicle range optimization
   - Design cycle time reduction: ~45%

3. **Renewable Energy**
   - Wind turbine blade design enhancement
   - Solar panel array aerodynamic configuration
   - Energy capture improvement: 2-5%

4. **Marine Engineering**
   - Hull design efficiency
   - Propulsion system optimization
   - Fuel consumption reduction: 6-12%

## Technical Approach

### Data Preprocessing
- CFD snapshots converted to 64×64 grayscale images
- Drag force values normalized using MinMax scaling
- Dataset divided into 70% training, 10% validation, and 20% testing sets

### Modeling Pipeline
1. **Baseline Model**: Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) for initial drag force predictions
2. **Optimized Model**:
   - **CNN**: Extracts spatial features from CFD snapshots
   - **LSTM**: Captures temporal evolution of flow patterns
   - **Grid Search**: Automated hyperparameter tuning with K-fold cross-validation
   - **Output**: Single normalized drag value that can be converted to physical units

## Quick Start

### Deploy Using Docker

```bash
# Clone the repository
step 1:
git clone https://github.com/maelzain/DigTwinDragPrediction.git
cd DigTwinDragPrediction
step 2:
# Build and run containers
docker-compose up --build


to stop: docker-compose down
to rerun:docker-compose up

step 3:
run streamlit :streamlit run streamlit_app.py
run api: python test_api.py
```

Services will be accessible at:
- **Streamlit UI**: http://localhost:8501
- **API**: http://localhost:5000

### Run Locally

```bash
# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# Terminal 1: Start the Flask API
python api_server.py

# Terminal 2: Start the Streamlit UI
streamlit run streamlit_app.py --server.port=8501 --server.address=0.0.0.0


```

## Training & Evaluation

```bash
# Split dataset, train models, and save results
python main.py

# Evaluate models on test dataset
python evaluate.py
```

## API Testing

```bash
# Test API endpoints interactively
python test_api.py
```

The script will guide you through selecting an image, model type, Reynolds number group, and send a request to the API. The response includes the predicted drag in physical units.

## Project Structure

```
DigitalTwinDragPrediction/
├── code/
│   ├── models/
│   │   ├── baseline_model.py
│   │   ├── cnn_model.py
│   │   └── lstm_model.py
│   └── utils/
│       ├── csv_utils.py
│       ├── image_utils.py
│       └── data_loader.py
├── api_server.py         # Flask API for drag prediction
├── train.py              # Training routines (includes grid search integration)  
├── main.py               # Orchestrates data splitting and model training
├── evaluate.py           # Evaluates saved models on test dataset
├── streamlit_app.py      # Interactive UI using Streamlit
├── test_api.py           # Script for testing API endpoints
├── Dockerfile
├── docker-compose.yml
├── requirements.txt
├── config.yaml           # Configuration parameters
└── README.md

Best CNN+LSTM hyperparameters BY Grid search method: {'cnn.learning_rate': 0.0005, 'cnn.epochs': 30, 'cnn.batch_size': 20, 'cnn.latent_dim': 256, 'lstm.learning_rate': 0.0005, 'lstm.epochs': 100, 'lstm.batch_size': 64, 'lstm.hidden_size': 64}
```

## Future Roadmap

- Extend the framework to 3D flow fields and complex geometries
- Integrate real-time sensor data for adaptive model retraining
- Develop advanced MLOps pipelines for CI/CD
- Enhance visualization dashboards with detailed error analysis
- Implement transfer learning for cross-domain applications
- To enhance the predictive modeling accuracy of Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) neural networks, it is essential to synthesize diverse datasets across multi-scenario operational contexts. This approach enables robust forecasting capabilities by expanding the training data's variability, ensuring the model generalizes effectively to unseen temporal patterns and dynamic real-world conditions. Strategic data augmentation and scenario simulation will further strengthen the LSTM's ability to capture complex dependencies and improve its resilience to evolving input distributions. 

## ROI Analysis

- **Initial Investment**: $75,000 - $150,000
- **Projected ROI**: 200-350% within 24 months
- **Break-Even Point**: Approximately 8-12 complex simulation projects

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please:
1. Open an issue to discuss proposed changes
2. Submit a pull request
3. Follow established coding standards
4. Ensure all changes are documented

## Contact

**Mahdi ELzain**
- **Email**: mahdielzain@outlook.com
- **GitHub**: [@maelzain](https://github.com/maelzain)

## Acknowledgments

Special thanks to Dr. Ammar Mohanna for valuable guidance and support throughout this project.

- **GitHub**:https://github.com/AmmarMohanna
## License

This project is licensed under AUB terms.
